---
title: "Changepoint detection: Theory, algorithms, and application in intracellular transport"
collection: publications
category: thesis
permalink: /publication/2025-04-14-thesis
excerpt: 'Submitted for the degree of Doctor of Philosophy to the Department of Mathematics'
date: 2025-04-14
venue: 'Tulane University'
paperurl: 'https://linhdo154.github.io/files/2025_Linh_Thesis_final.pdf'

---

Changepoint detection plays a vital role in statistical analysis, with applications in biological data and beyond. In this thesis, we explore methods for detecting changes in mean, variance, and velocity, addressing challenges in computational efficiency and statistical reliability. 

Motivated by intracellular transport with the challenge of detecting velocity changes in multidimensional data, we first introduce CPLASS, an algorithm using a Markov Chain Monte Carlo (MCMC)-based approach with a special proposal for navigating the parameter space. With the proving techniques from the Empirical Process theory, we show the consistency and convergence rates in estimating parameters using our proposed method. For dueling with the small sample size in molecular motor data, we introduce a speed penalty that improves small sample size power and performance while not compromising the large sample consistency. In the study of lysosomal transport, a statistical test for stationary states is proposed using a piecewise linear continuous model. Its effectiveness is examined under different conditions. 

A second algorithm introduced is the Dendrogram Pruning and Merging (DPM) algorithm, an agglomeration approach that reduces computational cost by constructing a hierarchical structure of changepoint locations. This algorithm is developed to detect changes in mean and variance. We also propose a new selection criterion for model selection based on the proposed pruning and merging procedure, called the Dendrogram Selection Criterion (DSC). Finally, we establish theoretical guarantees for the DPM algorithm, proving its convergence and consistency. Through simulations and real-world applications, we evaluate the strengths and limitations of our methods, aiming to contribute useful tools for changepoint detection research.